### The Rocket Tracker

Over the last few years, me and my dad have gotten more and more involved in the world of amateur high-power rocketry through our local branch of the Tripoli rocketry club. As we started working on bigger and more powerful rockets, we ended up having the same problem that so many others in the rocketry community have came across aswell: when my rocket lands in a corn field, how do I find it? The most common solution is to equip the rocket with a long-range radio tracking device, and this can come in the form of small radio direction finding (RDF) beacons for falconry to GPS-based tracking devices that sometime require HAM liscensing. I thought it would be a fun challenge to design my own tracking device to launch in our rockets, so here we are! It has certainly been an adventure designing my own tracking system and I've learned so much about PCB design, electronics, and RF along the way.

#### The Tracking System

My tracking system is similar to many existing tracking devices purpose-built for amateur rocketry (such as the Eggfinders) consisting of a tracking device (on the rocket) using a GPS, and a receiver that will hook to a computer. My tracking device is not a simple "dumb transmitter" that only sends location and telemetry data to the ground receiver, it also incorporates two-way communication functionality for configuration and control and will eventually incorporate data logging along with a bluetooth or WiFi interface for downloading data logged during a flight. Sensor-wise, the board will utilize a high-G accelerometer, (6/9)-axis IMU, and barometer providing real-time trajectory, orientation, and altitude information alongside GPS position. Additionally, I'm building the receiver with an extensible design that will allow it to operate without being connected to a computer as an independant battery powered rocket-recovery device.
